C++20 concepts (#80)
hsf-training/cpluspluscourse: talk/expert/cpp20concepts.tex

> \subsection[tmpl]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\subsection[concepts]{C++20 Concepts}
```
The first part (in []) is for the top bar and should be super short, the other part is still in the agenda slide, so should fit in the width of a column

Author: ok. I would prefer to keep "Requirements and concepts", dropping C++20 which is already visible thanks to \frametitlecpp[20]. I insist on requirements because I feel most of the complex explanations are about requirements. Concepts are almost a detail, a way to group some requirements.

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
  \begin{block}{Motivation}

>     Generic programming is made of functions and class templates

Reviewer 2: Technically also variable templates.

Author: "... is made of variable, function and class templates..." ?

    which can be instantiated with different types. It is frequent
    to instantiate them with \textbf{unsuited types}, and the resulting
    compilation errors are generally very long and hardly understandable.
    As a last resort, the template authors are providing \textbf{documentation}
    about the relevant parameters, and practice some tricky
    \textbf{template meta-programmation}. C++20 finally brings simpler ways to

>     define constraints on template parameters !.

Reviewer: Too much text to be readable by the students. We need something structured, with a couple of head lines (e.g. "template difficulties", "Tricky meta-programmation", "The C++20 solution") and 1-3 bullets each time.
And I would put "Motivations" as the title of this slide

Author: I tried a bullet list.

>     define constraint on template parameters ! Among different proposals,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    define constraints on template parameters ! Among different proposals,
```

>     the ISO committee has validated the flavor known as {\em Concepts Lite}.

Reviewer 2: Is this relevant? Why would a student care which concept approach was finally taken?

Author: When I was talking about concepts 1-2 years ago, someone looking for concepts information on internet may face several flavors, amd may find useful to know that the validated ones are the "Concepts Lite". As you say, not sure if is useful today. And not sure a student will care about. Someone else opinion ?

Author: I remove.

\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]

>   \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \frametitlecpp[20]{Concepts in a nutshell}
```

Author: Moved to the end...

>   \begin{block}{Requirements and concepts in a nutshell}

Reviewer: Drop that level of block, it's already the slide title.
And use blocks to split the content into pieces and make it more digest, e.g. 1 block with title "Principle" and bullet 1, 3 and 4 and one block with title "Notes" and bullets 2, 4, 5.

Author: Mobed at the end as "to be remembered". What would you advice now ?

    \begin{itemize}

>     \item A template can now define requirements on its parameters.

Reviewer: Let's try to lighten a bit each line to have less text. Here is could become
```suggestion
    \item template parameters can have requirements
```

Author: Again, check the new version.

>     \item A template can define requirements on some of its type parameters.

Reviewer 2: Also on value parameters, e.g.:
```c++
template <int I> requires(I < 2)
struct S {};
```

Author: True.

>     \item A typical set of requirements can be gathered in a reusable concept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item a set of requirements can be gathered in a concept
```

>     \item Compiler error messages clearly state which parameter value does not fulfill which expected requirement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    \item Compiler error messages clearly state which argument value does not fulfill which expected requirement.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item compiler error messages explain clearly missing requirements
```

>     \item Overload resolution takes those requirements and concepts into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item overload resolution takes  requirements into account.
```

>     \item The standard library now provides many concepts, easy to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item the standard library provides many ready to use concepts
```

>     \item Writing a new perfect concept stays an expert topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item writing a new good concept is an expert topic
```

    \item Writing a new perfect concept stays an expert topic.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]

>   \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  \frametitlecpp[20]{Before C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
```
Since the entire slide is about the old way, maybe choose a different title.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The world before concepts}
```

  \begin{block}{Old-style SFINAE example}

>     The old way to forbid some type arguments is the definition of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The old way to forbid some template arguments is the definition of
```
Because you can also check non-type template parameter.

    fake template arguments, which lead to a substitution failure when

>     the type does not fulfill the condition.

Reviewer 2: Are you explaining SFINAE somewhere? Because if not, this is really too short to explain it. At least you should mention that SFINAE removes overload form an overload set. If you want to explain SFINAE at all.

      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return (e1==e2) ; }

      template< typename T>
      requires
        (std::is_floating_point_v<T>) &&
        (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0)
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{block}
  \end{frame}

  \begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
    \begin{block}{Concepts}
      When a given set of requirements may be reused often, one should gather them in a concept.
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it concept}}
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      concept MyFloatingPoint =
        (std::is_floating_point_v<T>) &&
        (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0) ;

      template<typename T>
      requires MyFloatingPoint<T>
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{block}
  \end{frame}

  \begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
    \begin{block}{Within the template head}

>         Actually, when relevant, the concept can be directly used instead of {it typename} within the template head.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        The concept can also be directly used instead of {it typename} within the template head.
```
Otherwise I am asking myself when it is relevant and then you should explain in which situation which syntax is to be preferred.

>         Actually, when relevant, the concept can be directly used instead of {it typename} within the template head.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Actually, when relevant, the concept can be directly used instead of {it typename} within the template parameter list.
```

Author: Agreed.

    \begin{exampleblock}{Instead of {\it typename}}
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      concept MyFloatingPoint =
        (std::is_floating_point_v<T>) &&
        (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0) ;

      template<MyFloatingPoint T>
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
  \end{frame}

  \begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
    \begin{block}{With abbreviated function templates}
        The concepts can be used together with {\it auto} in the abbreviated function templates.
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it auto}}
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      concept MyFloatingPoint =
        (std::is_floating_point_v<T>) &&
        (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0) ;

      bool equal( MyFloatingPoint auto e1, MyFloatingPoint auto e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
  \end{frame}

  \begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
    \begin{block}{Standard concepts}

>         Writing a bug-proof concept is actually is really expert task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Writing a bug-proof concept is an expert task.
```

        Whenever you can, use the ones provided by the standard library.

>         Not surprinsgly, there is one for floating point numbers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Not surprisingly, there is one for floating point numbers.
```

    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it std::}}
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      #include <concepts>

      bool equal( std::floating_point auto e1, std::floating_point auto e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
  \end{frame}

  \begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{C++20 Requirements and Concepts}
    \begin{block}{Within a function body}

>     Concepts are usable wherever a boolean is expected, including {\it if constexpr}, because they are evaluated at compile-time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Concepts are also usable wherever a boolean is expected, including {\it if constexpr}, because they are evaluated at compile-time.
```

      \scriptsize
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return (e1==e2) ; }

      template< typename T>
      requires (std::is_floating_point_v<T>)
            && (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0)
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}
    \begin{block}{Concepts}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item When a given set of requirements may be reused often, one can gather them in a concept.
      \end{itemize}
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it concept}}
      \scriptsize
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      concept MyFloatingPoint =
        (std::is_floating_point_v<T>) &&
        (std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon()>0) ;

      template<typename T>
      requires MyFloatingPoint<T>
      bool equal( T e1, T e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}

>     \begin{block}{Within the template head}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    \begin{block}{Concepts as template parameters}
```

      \end{itemize}
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it auto}}
      \scriptsize
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      bool equal( MyFloatingPoint auto e1, MyFloatingPoint auto e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}
    \begin{block}{Standard concepts}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item Writing a bug-proof concept is an expert task.
        \item Prefer the ones provided by the standard library.
        \item Not surprisingly, there is one for floating point numbers.
      \end{itemize}
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{With {\it std::}}
      \scriptsize
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      #include <concepts>

      bool equal( std::floating_point auto e1, std::floating_point auto e2 )
      { return abs(e1-e2)<std::numeric_limits<T>::epsilon() ; }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}
    \begin{block}{Within a function body}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item Concepts are also usable wherever a boolean is expected.

>         \item Since they are evaluated at compile-time, they can appear in a {\it if constexpr} condition.

Reviewer 3: What about e.g. `\texttt` or `\mintinline`? Like this, the keywords look a bit more like code.

Author: @hageboeck \mintinline did not work. \texttt is not very distinguishable from the rest of the text. I failed also with things like \texttt{\textbf{taratata}}... but I am not at ease with latex and loosing much time waiting the latex compilation after each try. Thinking of going back to \it...

Author: @sponce By th eway, I think the chosen default policy, "sans-serif" is ok for the slides titles, but some "serif" policy would be better for the text. I have no idea how to change that in latex ;) The general typographic rule I have in mind is that  one should choose sans-serif policy for the titles, so that it "stop the look", and that a serif policy should be used for usual text that one should read smoothly. As a side effect, the code keywords that we would like to put in \texttt would be more visibles.

        else
        { return (e1==e2) ; }
      }
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}
    \begin{block}{Advanced requirements}
        Rather than the basic requirements above, one may use a \textbf{requires-expression}, able to:
        \begin{itemize}
            \item include basic requirements as before,
            \item list some expressions that must be valid,
            \item check the return type of some expressions.
        \end{itemize}
    \end{block}
    \begin{exampleblock}{Requires-expression}
      \scriptsize
      \begin{cppcode*}{}
      template< typename T>
      concept StreamableAndComparableNumber = requires( T v1, T v2 )
       {
        requires std::integral<T> || std::floating_point<T> ;
        std::cout<<v1<<v2 ;
        { equal(v1,v2) } -> std::convertible_to<bool> ;
       } ;
      \end{cppcode*}
    \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{Requirements and concepts}
    \begin{block}{To be remembered}
      \begin{itemize}
      \item A template can now {\it requires} properties of its parameters.

>       \item Compiler error messages clearly state which argument does not fulfill which requirement.

Reviewer 3: Could we maybe show an example for a compiler error before/after introducing concepts?

Author: @sponce @hageboeck I tried to put some (highly repaginated) extracts of compiler error messages. What do you think ?

Reviewer 3: I didn't know what I was asking for. 🙂 Those errors are probably too much to show them in the lecture.

Maybe if we only show the last lines?
```
...
error: no type named 'type' in 'struct std::enable_if<false, void>'
```
vs
```
...
the expression 'is_floating_point_v<T> [with T = int]' evaluated to 'false'
```
